According to the United Nations, 2.2 billion people lack access to safely managed drinking water. At the current rate of progress (2015–2022), efforts must be multiplied by six to meet the SDG target by 2030. In response, WHO has developed locally relevant drinking water guidelines, while also implementing and auditing water safety plans. To support WHO's approach, this project focuses on providing a robust, scalable, and cost-effective system for monitoring drinking water. WHO uses Free Chlorine Residue (FCR) as the standard for water safety in chlorination projects, but it can be difficult to implement in low-resource settings. This project aims to explore the use of Oxidation Reduction Potential (ORP) sensors to approximate FCR levels. The team will use the Van Haute and Lindmark formulas as a baseline while exploring the accuracy of other classification models. If successful, the ORP-based method could offer a more affordable and reliable alternative to costly colorimetric and amperometric methods for measuring water safety.


Pickering Lab combines engineering, epidemiology, and genomics to address disease transmission in low-income settings. Their focus includes designing, evaluating, and scaling WASH (Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene) technologies, like passive chlorination, contributing to SDG 6. They collaborate with partners such as World Vision (WV), which emphasizes child well-being, and Care, which focuses on community-level solutions. Recently, Pickering Lab completed a randomized control trial in India to study the impact of chlorination on water safety. If well-coordinated, their partnership with WV and Care could develop cost-effective alternatives for water safety monitoring, accelerating progress toward SDG 6 by 2030.

The client requires the team to develop, evaluate, and implement a robust, scalable ORP sensor-based water safety monitoring prototype to improve transparency and reduce operation time and costs. A user-friendly real-time dashboard will accompany the sensor for operational use. To contextualize the deployment, a business plan will be created based on interviews with stakeholders and partners. These interviews will explore current business processes and gather suggestions for system improvements. By combining the prototyping efforts and interview insights, we aim to create an affordable, reliable water monitoring system that enhances the provision of safe drinking water.
In response, Pickering Lab is developing a remote, real-time monitoring system for chlorine levels using sensor tools. Current free chlorine residual (FCR) measurement relies on the manual diethyl-p-phenylenediamine (DPD) method, which, while convenient, still requires manual work and consumable supplies. Furthermore, this manual DPD-based colorimeter method provides granular and low temporal resolution FCR data due to the current infrequent field testing and requires transportation cost.  Alternatively, a logarithmic regression model-based method is developed, which involves using ORP and pH as surrogates to estimate FCR levels in water. Research by Van Haute et al. (2019) established a relationship between ORP and FCR, allowing this conversion. To improve monitoring, Pickering Lab aims to create a real-time sensor with Wi-Fi capabilities. One such example is the SMART device, developed by Lindmark et al. (2020), though it is still at the lab scale. The goal is to make the sensor scalable for low-income communities, eventually serving 2.32 billion people reliant on passive chlorinators (Pickering et al., 2022). The lab is currently exploring the Atlas Scientific Wi-Fi Pool Kit and its automatic integration with ThingSpeak, an IoT analytics platform, for potential broader applications for remote in-line chlorine sensors.

# References

Van Haute, S., Zhou, B., Luo, Y., Sampers, I., Vanhaverbeke, M., & Millner, P. (2019). The use of redox potential to estimate free chlorine in fresh produce washing operations: Possibilities and limitations. Postharvest Biology and Technology, 156, 110957.

Lindmark, M. (2022). Sensors, circuit riders, and community-managed passive in-line chlorinators: evidence for improved access to safely managed drinking water in rural Central America (Doctoral dissertation, The University of Iowa).

Cherukumilli, K., Bain, R., Chen, Y., & Pickering, A. J. (2022). Estimating the Global Target Market for Passive Chlorination. Environmental Science & Technology Letters, 10(1), 105-110.

